# bytecode

As a novice, to implement an interpreter, it is naturally at a loss at the beginning, and there is no way to start.

Fortunately, the [previous section](./ch01-01.principles.md) introduces the bytecode at the end, and divides the entire interpreter process into two stages: parsing and execution. Then we can start with the bytecode:

- Determine the bytecode first,
- then let the parsing process (lexical analysis and parsing) work hard to generate this set of bytecodes,
- Then let the execution process (virtual machine) try to execute this set of bytecodes.

```
           generate execute
     parse -------> bytecode <------- virtual machine
```

But what does bytecode look like? How to define? What type? You can first refer to the official implementation of Lua.

## output of luac

For the convenience of description, the object code is listed again here:

```lua
print "hello, world!"
```

The official implementation of Lua comes with a very useful tool, `luac`, namely Lua Compiler, which translates the source code into bytecode and outputs it. It is our right-hand man in this project. Take a look at its output to the "hello, world!" program:

```
$ luac -l hello_world.lua

main <hello_world.lua:0,0> (5 instructions at 0x600000d78080)
0+ params, 2 slots, 1 upvalue, 0 locals, 2 constants, 0 functions
1 [1] VARARGPREP 0
2 [1] GETTABUP 0 0 0 ; _ENV "print"
3 [1] LOADK 1 1 ; "hello, world!"
4 [1] CALL 0 2 1 ; 1 in 0 out
5 [1] RETURN 0 1 1 ; 0 out
```

The first 2 lines of the output are incomprehensible, so ignore them first. The following should be the bytecode, and there are comments, which is great. But still do not understand. Check out Lua's [official manual](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.4/), but I can't find any explanation about bytecode. It turns out that the Lua language standard only defines the characteristics of the language, and the bytecode belongs to the "concrete implementation" part, just like the variable naming in the interpreter code, which does not belong to the definition scope of the Lua standard. In fact, the Luajit project that is fully compatible with Lua 5.1 uses a [completely different bytecode](http://wiki.luajit.org/Bytecode-2.0). We can even implement an interpreter without bytecode, uh, far away. Since the manual does not explain it, you can only check the [code comment] (https://github.com/lua/lua/blob/v5.4.0/lopcodes.h#L196) officially implemented by Lua. Here we only introduce the 5 bytecodes that appear above:

1. VARARGPREP, temporarily unused, ignored.
2. GETTABUP, this is a bit complicated, it can be temporarily understood as: loading global variables onto the stack. The three parameters are the stack index (0) as the target address, ignore, and the index (0) of the global variable name in the constant table. The global variable name listed in the comments later is "print".
3. LOADK, load constants onto the stack. The two parameters are the stack index (1) as the destination address, and the constant index (1) as the loading source. The value of the constant listed in the comment below is "hello, world!".
4. CALL, function call. The three parameters are the stack index (0) of the function, the number of parameters, and the number of return values. The following comment indicates that there is 1 parameter and 0 return value.
5. RETURN, temporarily unused, ignored.

Take a look at it together, it is

- First load the global variable named `print` into the stack (0);
- Then load the string constant `"hello, world!"` into the stack (1);
- Then execute the function at the stack (0) position, and take the stack (1) position as a parameter.

The stack diagram during execution is as follows:

```
   +-----------------+
0 | print | <- function
   +-----------------+
1 | "hello, world!" |
   +-----------------+
   | |
```

We currently only need to implement the above three bytecodes 2, 3, and 4.

## Bytecode definition

Now define the bytecode format.

First refer to the format definition of Lua's official implementation. [Source code](https://github.com/lua/lua/blob/v5.4.0/lopcodes.h#L13) has comments on the bytecode format:

```
   We assume that instructions are unsigned 32-bit integers.
   All instructions have an opcode in the first 7 bits.
   Instructions can have the following formats:

         3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
         1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
iABC C(8) | B(8) |k| A(8) | Op(7) |
iABx Bx(17) | A(8) | Op(7) |
iAsBx sBx (signed)(17) | A(8) | Op(7) |
iAx Ax(25) | Op(7) |
isJ sJ(25) | Op(7) |

   A signed argument is represented in excess K: the represented value is
   the written unsigned value minus K, where K is half the maximum for the
   corresponding unsigned argument.
```

The bytecode is represented by a 32bit unsigned integer. Among them, 7bit is a command, and the remaining 25bit is a parameter. There are 5 formats of bytecode, and the parameters of each format are different. If you like this sense of precise bit control, you may immediately think of various bit operations, and you may already be excited. But don’t worry, first look at Luajit’s bytecode format:

```
A single bytecode instruction is 32 bit wide and has an 8 bit opcode field and
several operand fields of 8 or 16 bit. Instructions come in one of two formats:

+---+---+---+---+
| B | C | A | OP |
|D|A|OP|
+---+---+---+---+
```

It is also a 32bit unsigned integer, but the division of fields is only accurate to bytes, and there are only 2 formats, which is much simpler than the official Lua implementation. In C language, by defining matching struct and union, bytecode can be constructed and parsed more conveniently, thus avoiding bit operations.

Since the Lua language does not specify the bytecode format, we can also design our own bytecode format. For different types of commands like this, where each command has unique associated parameters, it is most suitable to use Rust's enum, use tags as commands, and use associated values ​​as parameters:

```rust, ignore
{{#include ../listing/ch01.hello_world/src/bytecode.rs}}
```

Luajit's bytecode definition can avoid bit operations, and using Rust's enum can go a step further, and you don't even need to care about the memory layout of each bytecode. You can use the enum creation syntax to construct bytecode, such as `ByteCode::GetGlobal(1,2)`; use pattern matching `match` to parse bytecode. The parse and vm modules in [Section 1.4](./ch01-04.lets_do_it.md) construct and parse bytecodes respectively.

But also pay attention to ensure that the enum does not exceed 32bit, so you still need to understand the layout of the enum. The size of the enum tag in Rust is in bytes and is allocated on demand. So as long as there are less than 2^8=256 types of bytecodes, the tag only needs 1 byte. Only 7 bits are used to indicate the command type in Lua's official bytecode, so 256 is enough. Then there is still 3 bytes of space to store parameters. In the two bytecode types of Luajit, the parameters only occupy 3 bytes, which is enough. [This article](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/62547749/can-i-limit-the-size-of-a-rust-enum) introduces the method of static checking, but due to the need for third-party libraries or macros , we don't use it here for the time being.

> Rust's enums are really nice to use!

## two tables

As you can see from [analysis above] (output of #luac), in addition to bytecode, we also need two tables.

One is the **constant table**, which stores all the constants encountered during the parsing process, and the generated bytecode refers to the corresponding constant through the index parameter; during the execution process, the virtual machine reads it through the parameters in the bytecode constants in the table. In this example, two constants are encountered, one is the name of the global variable `print`, and the other is the string constant "hello, world!". This is the meaning of `2 constants` in the second line of the above luac output.

The other is **global variable table**, which saves global variables according to variable names. When the virtual machine is executed, first query the global variable name in the constant table through the parameters in the bytecode, and then query the global variable table according to the name. The global variable table is only used (add, read, modify) during execution, and has nothing to do with the parsing process.

The specific definition of these two tables needs to rely on the concept of Lua's "value", which will be introduced in the next section.