# Input Type

In the previous section we defined a function with generics. In fact, we "use" more generic types than "define". This chapter discusses another "use" example, which is the input type of the entire interpreter, that is, the lexical analysis module reads the source code.

Currently only reading source code from files is supported, and Rust's file type `std::fs::File` does not even include standard input. The lexical analysis data structure Lex is defined as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Lex {
     input: File,
     // omit other members
```

The method `read_char()` for reading characters is defined as follows:

```rust, ignore
impl Lex {
     fn read_char(&mut self) -> char {
         let mut buf: [u8; 1] = [0];
         self.input.read(&mut buf).unwrap();
         buf[0] as char
     }
```

Here we only focus on the `self.input.read()` call.

## Use `Read`

The official implementation of Lua supports two types of input files (including standard input) and strings as source code. According to the idea of Rust generics, the input we want to support may not be limited to *some specific types*, but *a type that supports certain features (ie traits)*. In other words, as long as it is a character stream, you can read characters one by one. This feature is so common that the [`std::io::Read` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/trait.Read.html) is provided in the Rust standard library. So modify the definition of Lex as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Lex<R> {
     input: R,
```

There are two changes here:

- Changed the original `Lex` to `Lex<R>`, indicating that Lex is based on the generic type `R`,
- Change the original field input type `File` to `R`.

Correspondingly, the implementation part should also be changed:

```rust, ignore
impl<R: Read> Lex<R> {
```

Added `<R: Read>`, indicating that the constraint of `<R>` is `Read`, that is, the type R must support the `Read` trait. This is because the `input.read()` function is used in the `read_char()` method.

The `read_char()` method itself does not need to be modified, and the `input.read()` function can still be used normally, but its meaning has changed slightly:

- When the input used the `File` type before, the `read()` function called was a method of the `File` type that implemented the `Read` trait;
- The `read()` function is now called on all types that implement the `Read` trait.

The statement here is rather convoluted, so you can ignore it if you don’t understand it.

In addition, generic definitions must be added to other places where Lex is used. For example, the definition of ParseProto is modified as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub struct ParseProto<R> {
     lex: Lex<R>,
```

The parameter of its `load()` method is also changed from `File` to `R`:

```rust, ignore
     pub fn load(input: R) -> Self {
```

`load()` supports `R` just to create `Lex<R>`, and `ParseProto` does not use `R` directly. But `<R>` still needs to be added to the definition of `ParseProto`, which is a bit long-winded. What's more verbose is that if there are other types that need to include `ParseProto`, then `<R>` should also be added. This is called generic type propagate. This problem can be circumvented by defining `dyn`, which will also bring some additional performance overhead. However, here `ParseProto` is an internal type and will not be exposed to other types, so `<R>` in `Lex` is equivalent to only spreading one layer, which is acceptable, and `dyn` will not be adopted.

Now that `Read` is supported, types other than files can be used. Next look at using stdin like and string types.

## Use Standard Input

The standard input [`std::io::Stdin` type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/struct.Stdin.html) implements the `Read` trait, so it can be used directly. Modify the `main()` function to use standard input:

```rust, ignore
fn main() {
     let input = std::io::stdin(); // standard input
     let proto = parse::ParseProto::load(input);
     vm::ExeState::new().execute(&proto);
}
```

Test source code from standard input:

```bash
echo 'print "i am from stdin!"' | cargo r
```

## Use String

The string type does not directly support the `Read` trait, because the string type itself does not have the function of recording the read position. `Read` can be realized by encapsulating [`std::io::Cursor` type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/struct.Cursor.html), which is used to   encapsulates `AsRef<[u8]>` to support recording position. Its [definition](https://doc.rust-lang.org/src/std/io/cursor.rs.html#74-77) is clear:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Cursor<T> {
     inner: T,
     pos: u64,
}
```

This type naturally implements the `Read` trait. Modify the `main()` function to use strings as source code input:

```rust, ignore
fn main() {
     let input = std::io::Cursor::new("print \"i am from string!\""); // string+Cursor
     let proto = parse::ParseProto::load(input);
     vm::ExeState::new().execute(&proto);
}
```

## Use BufReader

Reading and writing files directly is a performance-intensive operation. The above implementation only reads one byte at a time, which is very inefficient for file types. This frequent and small amount of file reading operation requires a layer of cache outside. The [`std::io::BufReader` type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/io/struct.BufReader.html) in the Rust standard library provides this functionality. This type naturally also implements the `Read` trait, and also implements the `BufRead` trait using the cache, providing more methods.

I originally defined Lex's input field as `BufReader<R>` type, instead of `R` type above. But later it was found to be wrong, because when `BufReader` reads data, it first reads from the source to the internal cache, and then returns. Although it is very practical for file types, while the internal cache is unnecessary for string types, and there is one more unnecessary memory copy. And also found that the standard input `std::io::Stdin` also has its own cache already, so no need to add another layer. Therefore, `BufReader` is not used inside Lex, but let the caller add it according to the needs (for example, for `File` type).

Let’s modify the `main()` function to encapsulate `BufReader` outside the original `File` type:

```rust, ignore
fn main() {
     // omit parameter handling
     let file = File::open(&args[1]).unwrap();

     let input = BufReader::new(file); // encapsulate BufReader
     let proto = parse::ParseProto::load(input);
     vm::ExeState::new().execute(&proto);
}
```

## Give Up `Seek`

At the beginning of this section, we only require that the input type supports character-by-character reading. In fact, it is not true, we also require that the read position can be modified, that is, the `Seek` trait. This is what the original `putback_char()` method requires, using the `input.seek()` method:

```rust, ignore
     fn putback_char(&mut self) {
         self.input.seek(SeekFrom::Current(-1)).unwrap();
     }
```

The application scenario of this function is that in lexical analysis, sometimes it is necessary to judge the type of the current character according to the next character. For example, after reading the character `-`, if the next character is still `-`, it is a comment; otherwise it is Subtraction, at this time the next character will be put back into the input source as the next Token. [Previously](./ch02-03.assignment.md) introduced that the same is true for reading Token in syntax analysis, and the current statement type must be judged according to the next Token. At that time, the `peek()` function was added to Lex, which could "peek" at the next Token without consuming it. The `peek()` here and the `putback_char()` above are two ways to deal with this situation. The pseudo codes are as follows:

```
// Method 1: peek()
if input.peek() == xxx then
     input.next() // Consume the peek just now
     handle(xxx)
end

// Method 2: put_back()
if input.next() == xxx then
     handle(xxx)
else
     input.put_back() // plug it back and read it next time
end
```

When using the `File` type before, because the `seek()` function is supported, it is easy to support the `put_back` function later, so the second method is adopted. But now the input has been changed to `Read` type, if `input.seek()` is still used, then the input is also required to have `std::io::Seek` trait constraints. Among the three types we have tested above, the cached file `BufReader<File>` and the string `Cursor<String>` both support `Seek`, but the standard input `std::io::Stdin` does not support it, and there may be other input types that support `Read` but not `Seek` (such as `std::net::TcpStream`). If we add `Seek` constraints here, the road will be narrowed.

Since `Seek` cannot be used, there is no need to use the second method. You can also consider the first method, which is at least consistent with Token's `peek()` function.

The more straightforward approach is to add an `ahead_char: char` field in Lex to save the character peeked to, similar to the `peek()` function and the corresponding `ahead: Token` field. It's simpler to do this, but there's a more general way of doing it in the Rust standard library, using `Peekable`. Before introducing Peekable, let's look at the `Bytes` type it depends on.

## Use Bytes

The implementation of the `read_char()` function listed at the beginning of this section is a bit complicated relative to its purpose (reading a character). I later discovered a more abstract method, the `bytes()` method of the `Read` triat, which returns an iterator `Bytes`, and each call to `next()` returns a byte. Modify the Lex definition as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Lex<R> {
     input: Bytes::<R>,
```

Modify the constructor and `read_char()` function accordingly.

```rust, ignore
impl<R: Read> Lex<R> {
     pub fn new(input: R) -> Self {Lex {
             input: input.bytes(), // generate iterator Bytes
             ahead: Token::Eos,
         }
     }
     fn read_char(&mut self) -> char {
         match self.input.next() { // just call next(), simpler
             Some(Ok(ch)) => ch as char,
             Some(_) => panic!("lex read error"),
             None => '\0',
         }
     }
```

The code for `read_char()` does not seem to be reduced here. But its main body is just `input.next()` call, and the rest is the processing of the return value. After the error handling is added later, these judgment processing will be more useful.

## Use `Peekable`

The `peekable()` method in the `Bytes` document, which returns the `Peekable` type, is exactly what we need. It based on the iterator, and we can "peek" a piece of data forward. Its [definition](https://doc.rust-lang.org/src/core/iter/adapters/peekable.rs.html#15-19) is clear:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Peekable<I: Iterator> {
     iter: I,
     /// Remember a peeked value, even if it was None.
     peeked: Option<Option<I::Item>>,
}
```

To this end, modify the definition of Lex as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub struct Lex<R> {
     input: Peekable::<Bytes::<R>>,
```

Modify the constructor accordingly, and add the `peek_char()` function:

```rust, ignore
impl<R: Read> Lex<R> {
     pub fn new(input: R) -> Self {
         Lex {
             input: input.bytes().peekable(), // generate iterator Bytes
             ahead: Token::Eos,
         }
     }
     fn peek_char(&mut self) -> char {
         match self. input. peek() {
             Some(Ok(ch)) => *ch as char,
             Some(_) => panic!("lex peek error"),
             None => '\0',
         }
     }
```

Here `input.peek()` is basically the same as `input.next()` above, the difference is that the return type is a reference. This is the same as the reason why the `Lex::peek()` function returns `&Token`, because the owner of the returned value is still input, and it does not move out, but just "peek". But here we are of `char` type, which is Copy, so directly dereference `*ch`, and finally return char type.

## Summary

So far, we have completed the optimization of the input type. From the beginning, only the `File` type is supported, and finally the `Read` trait is supported. There is not much content to sort out, but in the process of realization and exploration at the beginning, it took a lot of effort to bump into things. In this process, I also thoroughly figured out some basic types in the standard library, such as `Read`, `BufRead`, `BufReader`, also discovered and learned the `Cursor` and `Peekable` types, and also learned more about the official website documents way of organization. Learning the Rust language by doing is the ultimate goal of this project.