# table definition

Lua's table is externally represented as a unified hash table, and its index can be a number, a string, or all other Value types except Nil and Nan. However, for performance considerations, there is a special treatment for numeric types, that is, an array is used to store items indexed by consecutive numbers. So in the implementation, the table is actually composed of two parts: an array and a hash table. For this we define the table:

```rust, ignore
{{#include ../listing/ch04.table/src/value.rs:table}}
```

In order to support the characteristics of the meta table, other fields will be added in the future, which will be ignored here.

The table (and thread, UserData, etc. introduced later) type in the Lua language does not represent the object data itself, but [just a reference to the object data](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.4/manual.html# 2.1), all operations on table types are references to operations. For example, the assignment of a table only copies the reference of the table, rather than "deep copying" the data of the entire table. So the table type defined in `Value` cannot be `Table`, but must be a reference or a pointer. When the [string type](./ch03-01.string_type.md) was defined in the previous chapter, `Rc` was introduced and references and pointers were discussed. For the same reason, the pointer `Rc` is also used to encapsulate `Table` this time. In addition, `RefCell` needs to be introduced here to provide [internal mutability](https://kaisery.github.io/trpl-zh-cn/ch15-05-interior-mutability.html). In summary, the table type is defined as follows:

```rust, ignore
pub enum Value {
     Table(Rc<RefCell<Table>>),
```

The definition of the hash table part in `Table` is `HashMap<Value, Value>`, that is, the type of index and value is `Value`. The index type of [`HashMap`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/struct.HashMap.html) is required to implement the two traits `Eq` and `Hash`. This is also easy to understand. The working principle of the hash table is to quickly locate by calculating the hash value (`Hash`) of the index when inserting and searching, and to handle hash conflicts by comparing the index (`Eq`). Next, implement these two traits.

## `Eq` trait

We have implemented the `PartialEq` trait for `Value` before, which compares whether two Values are equal, or we can use the `==` operator on the Value type. The requirement of `Eq` is higher, which requires reflexivity on the basis of `PartialEq`, that is, it is required to satisfy `x==x` for any value `x` of this type. In most cases, it is reflexive, but there are also counterexamples. For example, in floating-point numbers, `Nan != Nan`, so although the floating-point type implements `PartialEq`, it does not implement `Eq`. Although our `Value` type includes floating-point numbers, since the Lua language prohibits the use of Nan as an index (specifically, we will judge whether the index is Nan when the virtual machine performs a table insertion operation), it can be considered that ` The Value` type satisfies reflexivity. For types that satisfy reflexivity, you just tell Rust that it does, no special implementation is required:

```rust, ignore
{{#include ../listing/ch04.table/src/value.rs:eq}}
```

## `Hash` trait

Most of the basic types in Rust have already implemented the `Hash` trait, and we only need to call `.hash()` for each type according to the semantics.

The code to implement the `Hash` trait is as follows:

```rust, ignore
{{#include ../listing/ch04.table/src/value.rs:hash}}
```

Many types, such as `bool`, `Rc` pointers, etc., have already implemented the hash method, but the floating-point type `f64` does not. The reason is also because of `Nan`. Here is a detailed [discussion](https: //internals.rust-lang.org/t/f32-f64-should-implement-hash/5436/2). It has been stated in the `Eq` trait section that Lua prohibits the use of Nan as an index, we can ignore Nan and the default floating-point type can be hashed. One way is to treat the floating-point number as a piece of memory for hashing. Here we choose to convert to the simpler integer `i64` for hashing.

This conversion uses the `mem::transmute()` function of the standard library, and this function is `unsafe`. We can clearly know that this conversion is safe (really?), so we can use this `unsafe` with confidence.

> When I first learned the Rust language, I saw that the description of some libraries clearly stated that "unsafe code is not included", and I felt that this is a very proud feature. So when I started this project, I also hoped not to have any unsafe code. But now it seems that unsafe is not a scourge. It may be similar to `goto` in C language. As long as it is used reasonably, it can bring great convenience.

For the string type, the hash needs to be calculated for the string content. For the table type, only the hash of the pointer needs to be calculated, and the contents of the table are ignored. This is because string comparisons are content comparisons, and table comparisons are [comparisons of table references](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.4/manual.html#3.4.4).

## `Debug` and `Display` traits

Because Rust's match is [exhaustive](https://kaisery.github.io/trpl-zh-cn/ch06-02-match.html#%E5%8C%B9%E9%85%8D%E6%98% AF%E7%A9%B7%E5%B0%BD%E7%9A%84), so the compiler will remind us to add the Table type in the `Debug` trait:

```rust, ignore
     Value::Table(t) => {
         let t = t.borrow();
         write!(f, "table:{}:{}", t.array.len(), t.map.len())
     }
```

There are 2 lines in the code block. Line 1 uses `borrow()`, which is a dynamic reference to `RefCell` type, to ensure that there are no other variable references. This dynamic reference introduces additional runtime overhead relative to most compile-time checks in Rust.

In the official implementation of Lua, the output format of the table type is the address of the table, which can be used for simple debugging. We have increased the length of the array and hash table parts of the table here, which is more convenient for debugging. In addition, we implement the `Display` trait for Value, which is used for the official output of `print`:

```rust, ignore
impl fmt::Display for Value {
     fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter) -> Result<(), fmt::Error> {
         match self {
             Value::Table(t) => write!(f, "table: {:?}", Rc::as_ptr(t)),
```