# `goto` Statement

This section describes the `goto` statement.

The `goto` statement and label can be used together for more convenient code control. But the `goto` statement also has the following restrictions:

- You cannot jump to the label defined by the inner block, but you can jump to the outer block;
- You cannot jump outside the function (note that the above rule has restricted jumping into the function). Since we do not support functions yet, ignore this for now;
- You cannot jump into the scope of local variables, that is, you cannot skip local statements. Note here that the scope ends at the last non-void statement, and the label is considered a void statement. My personal understanding is the statement that does not generate bytecode. For example the following code:

```lua
while xx do
     if yy then goto continue end
     local var = 123
     -- some code
     ::continue::
end
```

The `continue` label is behind the local variable `var`, but because it is a void statement, it does not belong to the scope of var, so the above `goto` is a legal jump.

The implementation of the `goto` statement naturally uses `Jump` bytecode. The main task of syntax analysis is to match `goto` and label, and generate `Jump` bytecode at the place of `goto` statement to jump to the corresponding label. Since the `goto` statement can jump forward, the definition of the corresponding label may not be encountered when the `goto` statement is encountered; it can also jump backward, so when the label statement is encountered, it needs to be saved for subsequent `goto` matching. Therefore, two new lists need to be added to `ParseProto` to save the goto and label information encountered during syntax analysis:

```rust, ignore
struct GotoLabel {
     name: String, // The label name to jump to/defined
     icode: usize, // current bytecode index
     nvar: usize, // the current number of local variables, used to determine whether to jump into the scope of local variables
}

pub struct ParseProto<R: Read> {
     gotos: Vec<GotoLabel>,
     labels: Vec<GotoLabel>,
```

Both lists have the same member type, `GotoLabel`. Among them, `nvar` is the current number of local variables. Make sure that the nvar corresponding to the paired `goto` statement cannot be smaller than the nvar corresponding to the label statement, otherwise it means that there is a new local variable definition between the `goto` and label statements, that is, `goto` jump into the scope of the local variable.

There are two implementations of matching `goto` statement and lable:

- One-time match at the end of the block:
   - When encountering a `goto` statement, create a new `GotoLabel` to join the list, and generate a placeholder Jump bytecode;
   - When encountering a label statement, create a new `GotoLabel` to add to the list.
  
   Finally, at the end of the block, match once and fix the placeholder bytecode.

- Live match:
   - When encountering a `goto` statement, try to match from the existing label list, if the match is successful, directly generate a complete Jump bytecode; otherwise create a new `GotoLabel`, and generate a placeholder Jump bytecode;
   - When encountering a label statement, try to match it from the existing `goto` list, and if it matches, repair the corresponding placeholder bytecode; since there may be other `goto` statements adjusted to this point, it is still necessary to create a new `GotoLabel`.

   At the end of the block, all matches have completed already.

It can be seen that although real-time matching is a little more complicated, it is more cohesive, and there is no need to execute a final function at the end. But this solution has a big problem: it is difficult to judge non-void statements. For example, in the example at the beginning of this section, when the `continue` label is parsed, it cannot be judged whether there are other non-void statements in the future. If there is, it is an illegal jump. It can only be judged after parsing to the end of the block. In the first one-time matching scheme, the matching is done at the end of the block. At this time, it is convenient to judge the non-void statement. Therefore, we choose one-time matching here. It should be noted that when Upvalue is introduced later, it will be found that the one-time matching scheme is flawed.

After introducing the above details, the overall process of syntax analysis is as follows:

- After entering the block, first record the number of `goto` and label before (outer layer);
- Parse block, record `goto` and label statement information;
- Before the end of the block, match the `goto` statement that appears in this block with all (including the outer layer) label statements: if there is a `goto` statement that is not matched, it will still be returned to the `goto` list, because it may be a jump to the block The label defined in the outer layer after exiting; finally delete all the labels defined in the block, because after exiting the block, there should be no other goto statements to jump in.
- Before the end of the entire Lua chunk, judge whether the `goto` list is empty. If it is not empty, it means that some `goto` statements have no destination, and an error is reported.

The corresponding code is as follows:

Record the number of `goto` and label existing in the outer layer at the beginning of parsing the block; and match and clean up the goto and label defined inside before the end of the block:

```rust, ignore
     fn block_scope(&mut self) -> Token {
         let igoto = self.gotos.len(); // Record the number of outer goto before
         let ilabel = self.labels.len(); // record the number of outer labels
         loop {
             // omit other statement analysis
             t => { // end of block
                 // Match goto and label before exiting the block
                 self.close_goto_labels(igoto, ilabel);
                 break t;
             }
         }
     }
```

The specific matching code is as follows:

```rust, ignore
     // The parameters igoto and ilable are the starting positions of goto
     //  and label defined in the current block
     fn close_goto_labels(&mut self, igoto: usize, ilabel: usize) {
         // Try to match "goto defined in the block" and "all labels".
         let mut no_dsts = Vec::new();
         for goto in self. gotos. drain(igoto..) {
             if let Some(label) = self.labels.iter().rev().find(|l|l.name == goto.name) { // matches
                 if label.icode != self.byte_codes.len() && label.nvar > goto.nvar {
                     // Check whether to jump into the scope of local variables.
                     // 1. The bytecode corresponding to the label is not the last one,
                     //    indicating that there are non-void statements in the follow-up
                     // 2. The number of local variables corresponding to the label is
                     //    greater than that of goto, indicating that there are newly
                     //    defined local variables
                     panic!("goto jump into scope {}", goto.name);
                 }
                 let d = (label.icode as isize - goto.icode as isize) as i16;
                 self.byte_codes[goto.icode] = ByteCode::Jump(d - 1); // fix bytecode
             } else {
                 // If there is no match, put it back
                 no_dsts.push(goto);
             }
         }
         self. gotos. append(&mut no_dsts);

         // Delete the label defined inside the function
         self. labels. truncate(ilabel);
     }
```

Finally, before the chunk is parsed, check that all gotos are matched:

```rust, ignore
     fn chunk(&mut self) {
         assert_eq!(self. block(), Token::Eos);
         if let Some(goto) = self. gotos. first() {
             panic!("goto {} no destination", &goto.name);
         }
     }
```

This completes the `goto` statement.