# `repeat..until` and `continue` Statements

This section introduces the `repeat..until` statement, and discusses and attempts to introduce the `continue` statement that Lua language does not support.

## `repeat..until` Statement

The `repeat..until` statement is similar to the `while` statement, except that the judgment condition is placed behind to ensure that the internal code block is executed at least once.

```
     +--------+
     | repeat |
     +--------+
/--->
|        block
|
|    +-----------------+
\----| until condition |
     +-----------------+
```

The format of the final generated bytecode sequence is as follows, where `...` represents the bytecode sequence of the inner code block:

```
     ... <--\
     Test ---/ `until` judgment condition
```

Compared with the bytecode sequence of the `while` statement, it seems that the Test is put at the end and the original Jump bytecode is replaced. But the situation is not that simple! Putting the judgment conditional statement behind the block will introduce a big problem. The local variables defined in the block may be used in the judgment conditional statement. For example, the following example:

```lua
-- keep retrying until the request succeeds
repeat
     local ok = request_xxx()
until ok
```

The variable `ok` after the last line `until` is obviously intended to refer to the local variable defined in the second line. However, the previous code block analysis function `block()` has [deleted the internally defined local variables](./ch06-01.if.md#variable-scope-in-block) at the end of the function. That is to say, according to the previous syntax analysis logic, when `until` is parsed, the internally defined `ok` local variable has become invalid and cannot be used. This is clearly unacceptable.

In order to support the ability to read internal local variables during `until`, the original `block()` function needs to be modified (the code is always messed up by these strange requirements), and the control of local variables is independent. For this reason, a `block_scope()` function is added, which only does syntax analysis; while the scope of internal local variables is completed by the outer `block()` function. In this way, the place where the `block()` function was originally called (such as if, while statement, etc.) does not need to be modified, and this special `repeat..until` statement calls the `block_scope()` function for finer control. code show as below:

```rust, ignore
     fn block(&mut self) -> Token {
         let nvar = self. locals. len();
         let end_token = self. block_scope();
         self.locals.truncate(nvar); // expire internal local variables
         return end_token;
     }
     fn block_scope(&mut self) -> Token {
         ... // The original block parsing process
     }
```

Then, the analysis code of the `repeat..until` statement is as follows:

```rust, ignore
     fn repeat_stat(&mut self) {
         let istart = self.byte_codes.len();

         self. push_break_block();

         let nvar = self.locals.len(); // Internal local variable scope control!

         assert_eq!(self. block_scope(), Token::Until);

         let icond = self.exp_discharge_top();

         // expire internal local variables AFTER condition exp.
         self.locals.truncate(nvar); // Internal local variable scope control!

         let iend = self.byte_codes.len();
         self.byte_codes.push(ByteCode::Test(icond as u8, -((iend - istart + 1) as i16)));

         self. pop_break_block();
     }
```

In the above code, the 2 lines commented complete the scope control of the internal local variables in the original `block()` function. After calling `exp_discharge_top()` and parsing the conditional judgment statement, the internally defined local variables are deleted.

## `continue` statement

It took a lot of space to explain the scope of variables in the `repeat..until` statement, which has a lot to do with the `continue` statement that does not exist in Lua.

When the `break` statement was supported in the previous section, it was mentioned that the Lua language does not support the `continue` statement. There is a lot of debate on this issue, and there is a high demand for adding a `continue` statement in Lua. As early as 2012, there was a related [proposal](http://lua-users.org/wiki/ContinueProposal), which listed in detail the advantages and disadvantages of adding the `continue` statement and related discussions. Twenty years have passed, and even though the stubborn Lua added the `goto` statement in version 5.2, it still did not add the `continue` statement.

The ["Unofficial FAQ"](https://www.luafaq.org/#T1.26) explains this:

- The `continue` statement is just one of many control statements, similar ones include `goto`, `break` with label, etc. The `continue` statement is nothing special, there is no need to add this statement;
- Conflicts with existing `repeat..until` statements.

In addition, an [email](http://lua-users.org/lists/lua-l/2008-02/msg01183.html) from Roberto, the author of Lua, is more representative of the official attitude. The reason for this is the first point above, that is, the `continue` statement is just one of many control statements. An interesting thing is that there are two examples in this email, and the other example just happens to be `repeat..until` besides `continue`. The above unofficial FAQ also mentioned that these two statements conflict.

The reason for the conflict between these two statements is that if there is a `continue` statement in the `repeat..until` internal code block, then it will jump to the until conditional judgment position. If there are local variables defined in the block are used in `until` statement, while the `continue` statement may skip the definition and jump to the `until`, then this local variable is meaningless in `until`. This is where the conflict lies. For example the following code:

```lua
repeat
     `continue` -- jump to until, skip the definition of `ok`
     local ok = request_xxx()
until ok -- how to deal with `ok` here?
```

In contrast, the equivalent of the `repeat..until` statement in the C language is the `do..while` statement, which supports `continue`. This is because in the `do..while` statement of the C language, the conditional judgment after the while is outside the scope of the internal code block. For example, the following code will compile error:

```c
     do {
         bool ok = request_xx();
     } while (ok); // error: 'ok' undeclared
```

Such a specification (the conditional judgment is outside the scope of the inner code block) is not convenient in some usage scenarios (such as the above example), but there are also very simple solutions (such as move `ok `definition outside the loop), and the syntax analysis is simpler, for example, there is no need to separate the `block_scope()` function. Then why does Lua stipulate that the conditional judgment statement should be placed within the inner scope? The speculation is as follows, if Lua also follows the practice of C language (the conditional judgment is outside the scope of the internal code block), and then the user writes the following Lua code, `ok` after the until will be parsed as a Global variables, without reporting errors like C language! This is not the user's intention, thus causing a serious bug.

```lua
repeat
     local ok = request_xxx()
until ok
```

To sum up, the `repeat..until` statement needs to put the conditional judgment statement after `until` in the scope of the internal code block in order to avoid bugs with a high probability; then when the `continue` statement jumps to the conditional statement, it may skip the definition of local variables, and then there is a conflict.

## Try Adding `continue` Statement

Lua's official [reason for not supporting the `continue` statement](https://www.luafaq.org/#T1.26) is mainly that they think the frequency of use of the `continue` statement is very low and it is not worth supporting. But in my personal programming experience, whether in Lua or other languages, the frequency of use of the `continue` statement is still very high. Although it may not be as good as `break`, it is far more than `goto` and `break` with labels, and even more than `repeat..until` statement. Besides, the way to implement the `continue` function in Lua (`repeat..until true` + `break`, or `goto`) is more verbose than using `continue` directly. So can we add a `continue` statement to our interpreter?

First of all, we have to resolve the conflict with `repeat..until` mentioned above. There are several solutions:

- Make a rule that the `continue` statement is not supported in `repeat..until`, just like the `if` statement does not support `continue`. But this is very easy to cause misunderstanding. For example, a piece of code has two layers of loops, the outer layer is a `while` loop, and the inner layer is a `repeat` loop; the user wrote a `continue` statement in the inner loop, intending to make the inner `repeat` loop take effect, but because `repeat` does not actually support `continue`, Then it will take effect in the outer while loop, and `continue` the outer `while` loop. This is a serious potential bug.

- Make a rule that the `continue` statement is prohibited in `repeat..until`. If there is `continue`, an error will be reported. This can avoid the potential bugs of the above scheme, but this prohibition is too strict.

- Make a rule that if an internal local variable is defined in `repeat..until`, the `continue` statement is prohibited. This plan is a little more relaxed than the last one, but it can be more relaxed.

- Make a rule that after the `continue` statement appears in `repeat..until`, the definition of internal local variables is prohibited; in other words, `continue` prohibits jumping to local variable definitions. This is similar to the restriction on subsequent `goto` statements. However, it can be more relaxed.

- On the basis of the previous solution, only the local variables defined after the `continue` statement are used in the conditional judgment statement after the `until`, which is prohibited. It’s just that the judgment of whether to use local variables in the statement is very complicated. If function closures and Upvalue are supported later, it is basically impossible to judge. So this plan is not feasible.

In the end, I chose to use the second-to-last solution. For specific coding implementation, there used to be `break_blocks` in `ParseProto` to record break statements, and now a similar `continue_blocks` is added, but the member type is `(icode, nvar)`. Among them, the first variable icode is the same as the members of `break_blocks`, and records the position of the Jump bytecode corresponding to the `continue` statement for subsequent correction; the second variable `nvar` represents the number of local variables in the `continue` statement, which is used for Subsequent checks to see if the new local variable has been jumped.

Second, adding a `continue` statement cannot affect existing code. In order to support the `continue` statement, it is necessary to use `continue` as a keyword (similar to the `break` keyword), so many existing Lua codes use `continue` as a label, or even a variable name or function name (essentially a variable name) will fail to parse. To this end, a tricky solution is not to use `continue` as a keyword, but to judge when parsing a statement that if it starts with `continue` and is followed by a block-ending Token (such as `end`, etc.), it is considered to be `continue` statement. Thus in most other places, `continue` will still be interpreted as a normal Name.

In the corresponding `block_scope()` function, the part starting with Token::Name, the newly added code is as follows:

```rust, ignore
         loop {
             match self. lex. next() {
                 // Omit parsing of other types of statements
                 t@Token::Name(_) | t@Token::ParL => {
                     // this is not standard!
                     if self.try_continue_stat(&t) { // !! New !!
                         continue;
                     }

                     // The following omits the parsing of standard 
                     // function calls and variable assignment statements
                 }
```

The `try_continue_stat()` function is defined as follows:

```rust, ignore
     fn try_continue_stat(&mut self, name: &Token) -> bool {
         if let Token::Name(name) = name {
             if name.as_str() != "continue" { // The beginning of the judgment statement is `continue`
                 return false;
             }
             if !matches!(self.lex.peek(), Token::End | Token::Elseif | Token::Else) {
                 return false; // Judgment followed by one of these 3 Tokens
             }

             // Then, it's the `continue` statement. The following processing
             // is similar to the break statement processing
             if let Some(continues) = self.continue_blocks.last_mut() {
                 self.byte_codes.push(ByteCode::Jump(0));
                 continues.push((self.byte_codes.len() - 1, self.locals.len()));
             } else {
                 panic!("continue outside loop");
             }
             true
         } else {
             false
         }
     }
```

Before parsing to the code block of the loop body, it must be prepared first, which is the `push_loop_block()` function. After the block ends, use `pop_loop_block()` to handle `break`s and `continue`s. The jump corresponding to `break`s is to jump to the end of the block, that is, the current position; the jump position corresponding to `continue`s is determined according to different loops (for example, the while loop jumps to the beginning of the loop, and the repeat loop jumps to the end of the loop) , so parameters are required to specify; in addition, when processing continus, it is necessary to check whether there are new definitions of local variables, that is, compare the number of current local variables with the number of local variables in the `continue` statement.

```rust, ignore
     // before entering loop block
     fn push_loop_block(&mut self) {
         self. break_blocks. push(Vec::new());
         self. `continue`_blocks. push(Vec::new());
     }

     // after leaving loop block, fix `break` and `continue` Jumps
     fn pop_loop_block(&mut self, icon`continue`: usize) {
         // breaks
         let iend = self.byte_codes.len() - 1;
         for i in self.break_blocks.pop().unwrap().into_iter() {
             self.byte_codes[i] = ByteCode::Jump((iend - i) as i16);
         }

         // continues
         let end_nvar = self. locals. len();
         for (i, i_nvar) in self.`continue`_blocks.pop().unwrap().into_iter() {
             if i_nvar < end_nvar {
                // i_nvar is the number of local variables in the 
                // `continue` statement, end_nvar is the number of
                // current local variables
                 panic!("`continue` jump into local scope");
             }
             self.byte_codes[i] = ByteCode::Jump((i`continue` as isize - i as isize) as i16 - 1);
         }
     }
```

So far, we have implemented the `continue` statement while ensuring backward compatibility! You can use the following code to test:

```lua
{{#include ../listing/ch06.control_structures/test_lua/continue.lua}}
```

## `repeat..until` Existence

As can be seen above, the existence of the `repeat..until` statement introduces two problems because the scope of the local variables defined in the block needs to be extended in the `until` part:

- In programming implementation, it is necessary to create a `block_scope()` function;
- Conflict with `continue` statement.

I personally think that introducing the above two problems in order to support a statement that is rarely used like `repeat..until` is not worth the candle. If I were to design the Lua language, this statement would not be supported.

In the 8.4 Exercise section of the official "Lua Programming (4th Edition)" book, the following questions are raised:

> Exercise 8.3: Many people think that because `repeat-until` is rarely used, it should not appear at the end in a simple programming language like Lua language. What do you think?

I really want to know the author's answer to this question, but unfortunately, none of the exercises in this book give an answer.